## What is SQL
SQL - structured query language

RBDMS - relational database management system

SQL is querying language used to communicate with an RBDMS

"Relational" Is the relationship of each member in a row from the different columns to each other. Each row is also known as a "tuple" Of values.
- a common misnomer is that relational refers to the foreign key relationships between multiple tables. It is believed so much that it is basically true now.

Foreign key constraint relationships provide "referential integrity", the guarantee that tables have connected data. This is essentially what separates an SQL database from an Excel spreadsheet.

SQL Consists of 3 subdomain type languages:
1. Data Definition Language (DDL) 
- used to define schema / structure of data
- CREATE TABLE / ALTER TABLE

2. Data Manipulation Language (DML)
- view and update data in the existing schema
- SELECT / INSERT / UPDATE / DELETE

3. Data Control Language (DCL)
- control access to data
- GRANT / REVOKE
- this can also be done at api layer


SQL standards across dialects maintained by ANSI and ISO 

ANSI - American Standards Institute
ISO - International Standards Organization

Popular vendors have their own dialects with minor differences:
- SQL Server (Microsoft)
	- Transact-SQL (T-SQL)
- Postgres (Open Source)
	- Procedural Language / pgSQL (PL/pgSQL)
- MySQL (Open Source)
	- SQL / Persistent Stored Module (PSM)

## Syntax
Sql is declarative. Meaning it describes what should be done, not how to do it (imperative style).

It follows natural language. Defines a verb followed by the subject and a predicate.

```sql
-- select all employees hired in 2000
SELECT 
    first_name
FROM
    employees
WHERE
    YEAR(hire_date) = 2000;
```

Select is the verb, employees are the subject, the where clause filter is the predicate

 ### Literals
Explicit values, aka constants

3 kinds of literals 
1. String - use single quotes - 'cat'
2. Numeric - no quotes - 42
3. Binary - uses hexadecimals - x'0f0ff'

### keywords and identifiers
Keywords - reserved words in SQL language like INSERT / UPDATE / DELETE

Identifiers - names of objects being manipulated

```sql
-- get all columns for all employees
SELECT * FROM employees;
```

SELECT and FROM are keywords, employees is an identifier of the table name.

SQL is case insensitive. By convention the keywords are capitalized for readability.

* is a wildcard meaning every column in the table.
