Subqueries are like subfunctions. They will be executed first, then there result dynamically entered into the full query. 

Best to read the outer query end to end, keeping a placeholder in mind for the subquery value. Subqueries can also be extracted out as CTE (common table expressions.) One of the great advantages of using an ORM is defining subqueries and assigning them to variables to re-use them and improve readability.

Example query to get a list of employees at a certain location. The subquery will generate the list of department ids for the location, which is passed to the top query:
```sql
SELECT 
    employee_id, first_name, last_name
FROM
    employees
WHERE
    department_id IN (SELECT 
            department_id
        FROM
            departments
        WHERE
            location_id = 1700)
ORDER BY first_name , last_name;
```

Subqueries can be used with the following clauses:
- FROM
- SELECT
- IN / NOT IN
- ANY / ALL
- comparison operators (>, <, =, >=, <=)
- EXISTS / NOT EXISTS

## Correlated Subquery
Otherwise known as a synchronized query or repeating subquery.
- This is different to a regular subquery which is executed once before being returned to the top level query. 
- A correlated subquery refers to column from the outer query, and is executed multiple times while calculating each row of the outer query.
- Less performant than a regular subquery. Is needed for certain use cases. Only use when necessary.
- Commonly used to answer "negative questions"

Good Example article:
https://learnsql.com/blog/correlated-sql-subquery-5-minutes/
- answer negative question: "Obtain the names of employees who never received an award"

```sql
SELECT last_name, first_name
FROM employee as e
WHERE NOT EXISTS(
	SELECT ph.last_name 
	FROM payment_history AS ph
	WHERE ph.employee_id  = e.employee_id
	AND ph.payment_type = 'award'
)
```
- NOT EXISTS will return true if there are no rows returned
- this is correlated subquery because inner query references the employee_id from employee table of outer query

Additional Article:
https://www.sqlshack.com/why-do-we-need-correlated-subqueries-in-sql/

## EXISTS
used to check for existence of rows in result of a subquery. 
- will return true for NULL rows. NULL is still a row

example can be seen above in correlated subquery section.

NOT EXISTS is jus the opposite of EXISTS

## ANY / ALL
compare all results of column to a single value and get a boolean

get employees with salary higher than all the salaries of department 2
```sql
SELECT 
    first_name, last_name, salary
FROM
    employees
WHERE
    salary > ALL (SELECT 
            salary
        FROM
            employees
        WHERE
            department_id = 2)
ORDER BY salary;
```
- subquery returns a result set of salaries, ALL will compare against all of them and return a TRUE / FALSE condition
- ANY works the same way, just has to be greater than one of the salaries, and will return TRUE immediately (short-circuit)




