Creating and updating table is known as "data definition language".

This defines the data types and relations between the tables.

To create a table you use CREATE TABLE, to modify use ALTER TABLE, to delete table use DROP TABLE, to delete data in table, use TRUNCATE TABLE.

Note that in real world applications, DDL is commonly done by the application using an ORM to represent the tables as objects, and alterations are tracked using database "migrations". This provides a way to track all changes done to the DB. Important still to understand the raw DDL syntax that is generated by the ORM.

## Create Table
```sql
CREATE TABLE trainings (
    employee_id INT,
    course_id INT,
    taken_date DATE,
    PRIMARY KEY (employee_id , course_id)
);
```
- note primary key can reference multiple columns

## ALTER TABLE
alter the trainings table, drop the date column
```sql
ALTER TABLE trainings
DROP COLUMN taken_date;
```

## DROP TABLE
This is not really used on a production DB, but is common for test suites to have idempotent tests.
```sql
DROP TABLE trainings;
```

## TRUNCATE TABLE
Deletes all the data inside a table while leaving the table intact. Similar to effect to using a DELETE statement, but more performant.

```sql
TRUNCATE TABLE trainings;
```

TRUNCATE vs. DELETE:
- TRUNCATE more performant
- truncate can't be used against column with foreign key constraint, only delete (which will clean up the related data)
- truncate does not fire configured delete triggers
- truncate resets auto-increment values, delete does not
- truncate removes all data, delete with where can remove partial data

