Constraints can be configured on the data value level by the data type of the column, and the NOT NULL constraint.

Constraints on the entire column can be configured by UNIQUE, PRIMARY KEY.

CHECK can check an entire column, or across an entire row.

FOREIGN KEYs effectively create constraints across tables, or at the "DB" level.

## Primary Key
Defines unique row value in a table. Key can be one column or "composite" combo of multiple columns. Can not be Null.

Primary keys can be "natural" key which is a naturally occuring SKU for example, or a "surrogate" key, which can be an auto-incrementing id or a generated uuid.

defining primary key example:
```sql
CREATE TABLE projects (
    project_id INT PRIMARY KEY,
    project_name VARCHAR(255),
    start_date DATE NOT NULL,
    end_date DATE NOT NULL
);
```

## Foreign Key
A key in a child table which references the primary key of the parent table. Provides referential integrity between tables. Will prevent deletion of linked data leading to an inconsistent state.

```sql
CREATE TABLE projects (
    project_id INT AUTO_INCREMENT PRIMARY KEY,
    project_name VARCHAR(255),
    start_date DATE NOT NULL,
    end_date DATE NOT NULL
);

CREATE TABLE project_milestones ( 
	milestone_id INT AUTO_INCREMENT PRIMARY KEY, 
	project_id INT, 
	milestone_name VARCHAR(100), 
	FOREIGN KEY (project_id) REFERENCES projects (project_id) );
```
- project_milestones is the child table here with the foreign key, that references parent projects table
- 1 to many relationship, as 1 project has many milestones

## Unique + Not NULL
Unique is on the column level that ensures a row is unique. Similar to Primary Key, but unique can be null, and multiple unique constraints can be added to different columns of same table, unlike primary key definitions.

Not Null is pretty simple, can't be null value

define unique usernames, and multiple non-null columns
```sql
CREATE TABLE users (
    user_id INT AUTO_INCREMENT PRIMARY KEY,
    username VARCHAR(255) NOT NULL UNIQUE,
    password VARCHAR(255) NOT NULL
);
```

## CHECK Constraint
Constraint that can validate a column or even multiple columns

CHECK applies to all rows in a column or all columns in a row

validate that selling price is positive, cost is positive, and that selling price is more than cost (multi-column check)
```sql
CREATE TABLE products (
	product_id INT PRIMARY KEY,
	product_name VARCHAR (255) NOT NULL,
	selling_price NUMERIC (10, 2) CHECK (selling_price > 0),
	cost NUMERIC (10, 2) CHECK (cost > 0),
	CHECK (selling_price > cost)
);
```

Note - True and Null return true for check. Use Not null as needed for these edge cases.