## SELECT
Choose list of columns to be in result.
Most examples here are from single table, but can add from multiple tables with joins, as well as generating new columns with expressions. 

```sql
SELECT 
    first_name, 
    last_name, 
    salary, 
    salary * 1.05 AS new_salary
FROM
    employees;
```

- sql engine actually evaluates the from clause before SELECT (from employees grab columns)
- the select list is the target columns
- the final column is an ad-hoc expression to calculate salary and aliasing the result column as new_salary

## Sorting - ORDER BY
```sql
SELECT
	first_name,
	last_name,
	salary
FROM
	employees
ORDER BY
	first_name,
	last_name DESC;
```

 Example result order: 
```sql
Alex Young 22000
Alfred Brown 10000
Bobby Zetts 35000
Bruce Willis 6000
```

- note the multiple ordering criteria
- display employee results sorted alphabetically by first name, then by last name in reverse alphabetical order
- ordering options ASC / DESC. Ascending by default.
- Order by can be any valid string or numerical expression. Even can order by date types for chronological order.

## Filtering

### DISTINCT
DISTINCT keyword to remove duplicate rows. 

Can be applied to single column or multiple columns. Multiple columns will return only unique combos

Single column:
```sql
SELECT 
    DISTINCT salary
FROM
    employees
ORDER BY salary DESC;
```

```sql
+----------+
| salary   |
+----------+
| 24000.00 |
| 17000.00 |
| 14000.00 |
```
- many employees have same salary but we want a set of the unique values

Multi-column
```sql
SELECT DISTINCT
	job_id,
	salary
FROM
	employees
ORDER BY
	job_id,
	salary DESC;
```
- get unique combos of job types and accompanying salary

### LIMIT / OFFSET
```sql
SELECT 
    employee_id, first_name, last_name
FROM
    employees
ORDER BY first_name
LIMIT 5 OFFSET 3;
```

LIMIT is to specify how many results you want back.
- Out of a list of 100 maybe you want just the top 10.

OFFSET is to start counting from the middle of the result set.
- 20 results, LIMIT 5, OFFSET 3, get items 4-8 (inclusive)

Very important to sort the list with ORDER BY otherwise you have no control of what you are chopping
- to get top 10 for example, ORDER BY DESC, then LIMIT 10

###  FETCH NEXT n ROWS
LIMIT / OFFSET are not technically SQL base standard keywords, rather vendor extensions. Though they are supported in all major RDBMS that you would typically use (postgres, mysql).

Performance for both is same. I think LIMIT is syntactically cleaner than fetch and as such is preferable.  For completeness here is same sample with FETCH

```sql
SELECT 
    employee_id, first_name, last_name
FROM
    employees
ORDER BY first_name
OFFSET 3
FETCH NEXT 5 ROWS;
```
- same result. Get employees 4-8 inclusive

### WHERE
filter results based on condition

```sql
SELECT
	employee_id,
	first_name,
	last_name,
	department_id
FROM
	employees
WHERE
	department_id = 5
ORDER BY
	first_name;
```
- get all employees from target department with id of 5
- WHERE predicate can be numeric, string matching, compare dates etc.
- WHERE can also be used with UPDATE and DELETE statements for targeting correct rows

### Comparison Operators
```sql
=	Equal
<>	Not equal to
>   Greater than
>=  Greater than or equal to
<	Less than
<=	Less than or equal to
```
<> has alias of !=, which is common to languages like python / JS

Used in WHERE clause predicates.

Not pure True  / False booleans, but rather three value result - True / False / Unknown. 

Unknowns will occur when comparing a Null to a True / False , or when comparing null to null.

If filtering for True, both False and Null will be excluded.

This thread has example:
https://stackoverflow.com/a/41180794

To compare Null values, dont use = NULL, rather IS NULL

```sql
SELECT 
    employee_id, first_name, last_name, phone_number
FROM
    employees
WHERE
    phone_number IS NULL;
```

### Logical Operators
Used together with comparison operators to evaluate predicates in WHERE clauses

```sql
SELECT 
    first_name, last_name, salary
FROM
    employees
WHERE
    salary > 5000 AND salary < 7000
ORDER BY salary;
```
- two comparison operators grouped together with logical AND
- This could also be expressed with Logical BETWEEN to define the range
	- salary BETWEEN 5000 and 7000


AND - Return true if both expressions are true

OR - Return true if either expression is true

NOT - Reverse the result of any other Boolean operator.

BETWEEN - Return true if the operand is within a range.

IN - Return true if the operand is equal to one of the value in a list
- salary in (4000, 5000, 7000)

LIKE - Return true if the operand matches a pattern

```sql
SELECT 
    employee_id, first_name, last_name
FROM
    employees
WHERE
    first_name LIKE 'jo%'
ORDER BY first_name;
```
- % is wildcard that matches multiple characters
- _ matches exactly one character
- jo% matches john, jose, joann
- jo_ would match joe, joy, jon

#### Multi Comparison operators
This is a special class of logical operator that applies to results of a subquery. 

ALL / ANY must be preceded by a comparison operator and followed by a subquery.

EXISTS is applied directly to subquery

```sql
SELECT 
    first_name, last_name, salary
FROM
    employees
WHERE
    salary > ALL (SELECT 
            salary
        FROM
            employees
        WHERE
            department_id = 8)
ORDER BY salary DESC;
```
- ALL filters for employees with salary greater than all of those department 8 employees

ALL - Return true if all comparisons are true

ANY - 	Return true if any one of the comparisons are true. SOME is an alias.

EXISTS- Return true if a subquery contains any rows

```sql
SELECT 
    first_name, last_name
FROM
    employees e
WHERE
    EXISTS( SELECT 
            1
        FROM
            dependents d
        WHERE
            d.employee_id = e.employee_id);
```
- filters employees who have dependents / workers under them

## CASE - WHEN - THEN
Add if / else logic chains to queries

Simple CASE
```sql
SELECT
	price, 
	color,
	CASE color
		WHEN "red" THEN "aggresive"
		WHEN "blue" THEN "reactive"
		WHEN "green" THEN "neutral"
	END mood
FROM
	paints
ORDER BY
	mood
```
- compare case value directly at each comparison

Boolean case
```sql
SELECT 
first_name, last_name,
CASE
  WHEN salary < 3000 THEN 'Low'
  WHEN salary >= 3000 AND salary <= 5000 THEN 'Average'
  WHEN salary > 5000 THEN 'High'
END evaluation
FROM
employees;
```
- no direct comparison to CASE value. Each expression is a boolean comparison.


