## UNION + UNION ALL
In contrast to JOINS, which combine multiple columns of different tables. UNIONs combine the ROWS of queries. The only condition being the data types must match.

This is analagous to a FULL JOIN, in that all the rows from both tables are combined, irregardless if the data in the rows match (duplicates removed by UNION, kept by UNION ALL). Remember that FULL JOIN however is combining columns from different tables, UNION combines rows.

Hypothetical example is you have customer and supplier tables and want to get master list of cities, so do a union on both tables and you'll have all the cities.

Another common use case: there exists an archived database with 10 years of sales records, and you want to merge it with a newer database of sales records in a sql analytics tool like powerBI etc. Can do a UNION on the rows of the tables to get one result set.

Also common when big data is partitioned across mutiple servers, and need to be rejoined for analysis.

UNION vs. UNION ALL:
- UNION combines rows of tables, eliminating duplicates
- UNION ALL keeps the duplicates


## INTERSECT
This is like a UNION, in that it combines DISTINCT rows, just that it only adds rows with matching data. Like Union, duplicates are removed.

You get the 'intersection' of data.

table A:
1,2,3

table B:
2,3,4

Intersection :
2,3

common use case, find employees working on 2 of the same projects "A" and "B"

```sql
-- Find employees working on project "A"
SELECT employee_id
FROM Employees
WHERE project_id = 'A'
INTERSECT
-- Find employees working on project "B"
SELECT employee_id
FROM Employees
WHERE project_id = 'B';
```

## MINUS / EXCEPT 
Similar to union, but get the difference between two sets of rows.

table A:
1,2,3

table B:
2,3,4

A - B:
1

B - A:
4

example, get all suppliers that have no orders
```sql
SELECT supplier_id
FROM suppliers
MINUS
SELECT supplier_id
FROM orders;
```

article on usage:
https://stackoverflow.com/questions/21018120/sql-minus-operation-using-join




